Using DuckDNS to overcome dynamic IP addresses (#320)
learning-software-engineering/learning-software-engineering.github.io: Topics/Development_Process/Duckdns.md

# Overcoming a Dynamic IP Address with DuckDNS

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: Wow, the Motivation is just superb! It got me hooked as I've actually faced this issue myself when I shutdown my EC2 instance just to find out the IP _changed_ the following time when I rebooted the instance causing a big pain as I had to change the references to to that IP in my code.

So you have chosen to deploy your application on AWS or perhaps you have turned a spare computer of yours into your home server. You are finally deployed and users can finally access your site! I mean, the address for your site may be something weird like `http://123.0.0.321` but at least _someone_ can access your site right?

> Well, if you ever have to restart your server to make updates or save some compute power when nobody is using your server, you may find that the next time you boot the server up, the IP address of your deployment has changed! Now you have to tell everyone your application has a new URL. This is because most hosting options (especially the free/low cost options) give your production server what is called a _Dynamic IP address_. In other words, services like AWS or your Internet Service Provider assign a new public (or external) IP address to your server whenever it boots up and joins the network. This is often done to save resources as an IP not used by one person can be used by another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, if you ever have to restart your server to make updates or save some computing power when nobody is using your server, you may find that the next time you boot the server up, the IP address of your deployment has changed! Now you have to tell everyone your application has a new URL. This is because most hosting options (especially the free/low-cost options) give your production server what is called a _Dynamic IP address_. In other words, services like AWS or your Internet Service Provider (ISP) assign a new public (or external) IP address to your server whenever it boots up and joins the network. This is often done to save resources as an IP not used by one person can be used by another.
```
I added ISP in brackets so that it is more clear when you mention ISP later on.

## What is DuckDNS?

DuckDNS is a Dynamic Domain Name Service provider. In other words, they are a service that maps domain names to dynamic IP addresses. When using DuckDNS, your application gets a domain name. As it is a free service however, this name will be a subdomain of DuckDNS (e.g. `http://my-cool-application.duckdns.org`). More importantly however, this name will not change. DuckDNS then provides a script you run on your server that tells DuckDNS what the external IP address of your server is. This script is configured by default to run every 5 minutes.

To summarize what DuckDNS does, whenever a user tries to navigate to your application, as part of resolving the domain name of your application, the user asks DuckDNS what the IP address is of your application. Since you constantly update DuckDNS with your application's IP address, the user is up to date with your server's address even if it changes.

![Image to illustrate how Dynamic DNS works](https://learningtechnix.files.wordpress.com/2020/04/ddns_image.png)

## How do I use DuckDNS?

> Using DuckDNS is very straightforward. You can sign up by logging into your twitter, github, or google account. You are then taken to a homepage that shows your account token and the domain name mappings you created. Simply create a new domain name for your application. You do not need to set your application's IP address on this page (the script that will be run does that for us).

Reviewer: Possibly mention the importance of keeping your account token secure and possibly hidden. If I understood correctly, the account token acts as a unique identifier for your DuckDNS account. Thus if it falls into the wrong hands, unauthorized individuals might gain access to your account and make changes without your permission.

> Using DuckDNS is very straightforward. You can sign up by logging into your twitter, github, or google account. You are then taken to a homepage that shows your account token and the domain name mappings you created. Simply create a new domain name for your application. You do not need to set your application's IP address on this page (the script that will be run does that for us).

Reviewer: Consider capitalizing Twitter, GitHub, and Google to make it more professional.

Author: Yeah, good catch! I should probably also change Twitter to X upon second glance haha

```

- Make the `duck.sh` file runnable by running `chmod 700 duck.sh`.

- Next, add a job to the running cron process by running `crontab -e` and pasting `*/5 * * * * <PATH TO FOLDER>/duckdns/duck.sh >/dev/null 2>&1` at the bottom of the crontab. This makes the `duck.sh` script run every 5 minutes. If you wish to modify how often this script gets run [this guide](https://www.hostinger.com/tutorials/cron-job) explains the crontab syntax to do so.

- After saving the file, we can finally test that the script works by running `./duck.sh`. This should create a file called `duck.log` which contains the result. If by running `cat duck.log` you get `OK` then you are all good to go! If you get `KO` as output, ensure you copied everything correctly.

If you have an issue getting the cron job to work, the node package [pm2](https://github.com/Unitech/pm2) is helpful in ensuring the `duck.sh` script always runs at boot and every 5 minutes thereafter (or however often you desire). For more details on these instructions and other methods of running the update script on various other devices, visit the DuckDNS [installation page](https://www.duckdns.org/install.jsp).

> ## A Note for Home Servers

Reviewer: Great addition as a lot of people might be running a home server.

Author: Thank you! While I don't think a student will be running a home server for their 301 project, I imagine a lot of 301 students will have side projects that do use a home server. Hopefully, this reminds them that they do need to port forward to get things up and running.

> Since DuckDNS updates your _external_ IP address, this will usually refer to your home router. This will be different from the actual IP address of your device on your home network that is running the server. After setting up DuckDNS, in order to tell your router to forward data to where your actual server is running you will need to do port forwarding. More information about what and why you would do this and how to setup your router for port forwarding can be found [here](https://portforward.com/)

Reviewer: Sorry getting picky but since 'setup' is used as a verb it should be 'set up' https://grammarist.com/spelling/set-up-vs-setup/#:~:text=Setup%20is%20one%20word%20when,set%20up%20the%20computer%E2%80%9D).

> ## External Resources

Reviewer: I would provide a reference to a community forum or support group where users can seek help from experienced users.
